MONETARY POLICY AND THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

The U.S. economy delivered a solid performance in 2005
despite a further sharp increase in energy prices and
devastating hurricanes that claimed many lives,
destroyed homes and businesses, and displaced more
than 1 million persons. Real gross domestic product is
estimated to have risen a little more than 3 percent
over the four quarters of 2005 even though growth
slowed significantly in the fourth quarter as a result
of storm-related disruptions and other factors that
are likely to prove transitory. The increase in real
GDP in 2005 was sufficient to add 2 million new jobs,
on net, to employers' payrolls and to further reduce
slack in labor and product markets. As in 2004,
overall consumer price inflation was boosted by the
surge in energy prices. Core consumer price inflation
(as measured by the price index for personal
consumption expenditures excluding the direct effects
of movements in food and energy prices) picked up
early in the year, but it subsequently eased and
totaled less than 2 percent over the year as a whole.
The dollar appreciated against most major currencies
in 2005, and, with domestic demand expanding strongly,
the U.S. current account deficit widened further.

In 2005, energy prices were up substantially for a
second year in a row. Crude oil costs climbed further,
on net, and prices of refined petroleum products and
natural gas came under additional upward pressure for
a time after supplies were curtailed by hurricane
damage to production facilities in the Gulf Coast
region. As a result, households in the United States
faced steep increases in gasoline and home heating
expenses, and many firms were likewise burdened with
rising energy costs.

The resilience of the U.S. economy in the face of
these major shocks likely reflects, in part,
improvements in energy efficiency over the past
several decades. A number of other factors also helped
to keep economic activity moving forward in 2005. For
one, the rapid gain in real estate values in the past
few years, in combination with the rise in stock
prices since 2002, has encouraged households to
sustain their spending through a period of relatively
weak growth in real income. For another, credit
conditions remained supportive for businesses last
year, facilitating a brisk expansion of capital
spending. In addition, labor productivity has been on
a strong uptrend in recent years, which has fostered
substantial growth in the economy's productive
capacity and no doubt lifted households' and
businesses' assessments of their long-term income
prospects.

In light of elevated inflation pressures and shrinking
margins of unutilized resources, and with short-term
interest rates relatively low, the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) continued to remove monetary policy
accommodation gradually in 2005, raising the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points at each of its
eight meetings. This cumulative policy firming of 2
percentage points was substantially greater than
market participants had expected at the start of the
year. But each action was anticipated by the time of
the meeting at which it was taken, as the Committee's
communications, policy strategy, and responses to
incoming economic data appear to have been well
understood. At its meeting in January 2006, the FOMC
increased the target federal funds rate another 25
basis points, bringing it to 4-1/2 percent. The
Committee indicated that possible increases in
resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices
had the potential to add to inflation pressures and
that, as a result, some further policy tightening may
be needed.

The U.S. economy should continue to perform well in
2006 and 2007. To be sure, higher energy prices will
probably exert some restraint on activity for a while
longer. But so long as energy price increases slow, as
is suggested by futures prices, this restraint should
diminish as 2006 progresses. In addition, economic
activity should receive some impetus from post-
hurricane recovery efforts. Although progress to date
has been uneven in the affected regions, the reopening
of facilities shut down by the hurricanes is already
being reflected in a rebound in industrial production.
Federal assistance will buttress rebuilding activity
in coming quarters.

More broadly, the major factors that contributed to
the favorable performance of the U.S. economy in 2005
remain in place. Long-term interest rates are low, and
conditions in corporate credit markets are generally
positive. The household sector is also in good
financial shape overall and should stay so even if--as
expected--the housing sector cools. In addition, the
improved outlook for economic growth abroad bodes well
for U.S. exports. However, the effects of the
cumulative tightening in monetary policy should keep
the growth in aggregate output close to that of its
longer-run potential.

Core inflation is likely to remain under some upward
pressure in the near term from rising costs as the
pass-through of higher energy prices runs its course.
But those cost pressures should wane as the year
progresses. Moreover, strength in labor productivity
should continue to damp business costs more generally.
With little evidence to date that resource utilization
has put appreciable upward pressure on prices, and
with longer-run inflation expectations continuing to
be well anchored, core inflation should remain
contained in 2006 and 2007.

Nonetheless, significant risks attend this economic
outlook. Some of the uncertainty is centered on the
prospects for the housing sector. On the one hand,
some observers believe that home values have moved
above levels that can be supported by fundamentals and
that some realignment is warranted. Such a
realignment--if abrupt--could materially sap household
wealth and confidence and, in turn, depress consumer
spending. On the other hand, if home values continue
to register outsized increases, the accompanying
increment to household wealth would stimulate
aggregate demand and raise resource utilization
further. With the economy already operating in the
neighborhood of its productive potential, this higher
resource utilization would risk adding to inflation
pressures. Another major source of uncertainty is the
price of energy, which continues to be buffeted by
concerns about future supply disruptions. Additional
steep increases in the price of energy would intensify
cost pressures and weigh on economic activity.


Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and the Economy in
2005 and Early 2006

The year 2005 opened with the target federal funds
rate at 2-1/4 percent, a level that Federal Reserve
policymakers judged to be quite accommodative. During
the first few months of the year, output appeared to
be growing at a solid pace despite rising energy
prices. Improving labor market conditions and
favorable financing terms were providing considerable
support to consumer outlays and homebuilding activity,
while reasonably bright sales prospects and strong
profitability were buoying business investment.
Pressures on inflation appeared to be mounting,
however, partly owing to increasing energy prices.
Measures of inflation compensation derived from
securities markets were on the rise as well. In these
circumstances, the Committee firmed policy 25 basis
points at both its February and March meetings and
signaled that, if economic conditions progressed as
anticipated, it would need to continue to remove
policy accommodation gradually to keep inflation
pressures contained.

In the spring, policymakers perceived some signs of
softness in spending, which they attributed in part to
the earlier step-up in energy prices. Nonetheless, the
federal funds rate was still relatively low, and
robust underlying growth in productivity was providing
ongoing support to economic activity. Accordingly, the
Committee anticipated some strengthening of activity,
and it reduced policy accommodation further in May by
lifting the target federal funds rate another quarter
percentage point, to 3 percent.

In the event, the signs of softness proved transitory.
Incoming data suggested that output, employment, and
spending were growing moderately through midyear.
Inflation expectations seemed to be well contained,
but pressures on inflation remained elevated. With the
stance of policy still accommodative, the Committee
added another 25 basis points to the target federal
funds rate at both its June and August meetings.
Subsequently, the devastation caused by Hurricane
Katrina increased uncertainty about the vitality of
the economic expansion in the near term. The
destruction in the Gulf Coast region, the associated
dislocation of economic activity--including
considerable disruption of energy production--and the
accompanying further boost to energy prices were
expected to impose some restraint on spending,
production, and employment in the near term. Although
the region had been dealt a severe blow, the Committee
did not see these developments as posing a more
persistent threat to the overall economic expansion.
Consequently, it decided to firm policy another 25
basis points at its September meeting.

Over the following weeks, the Gulf Coast region
absorbed further setbacks from Hurricanes Rita and
Wilma. The growth of economic activity dipped for a
time--hiring slowed, consumer spending softened, and
confidence declined. At the same time, however,
soaring energy prices fed through to top-line consumer
price inflation and pushed some survey measures of
inflation expectations upward. With employment and
growth expected to be supported by accommodative
financial conditions, the FOMC continued the process
of policy tightening at its November meeting.

By December, incoming data indicated that the overall
expansion remained on track, although recovery from
the damage in the hurricane-affected areas would
apparently require considerable time. The Committee
judged that possible increases in resource utilization
as well as elevated energy prices had the potential to
add to inflation pressures. Accordingly, policy was
firmed another 25 basis points, bringing the target
federal funds rate to 4-1/4 percent. In the
accompanying statement, monetary policy was no longer
characterized as "accommodative" because the federal
funds rate had been boosted substantially and was now
within the broad range of values that, in the judgment
of the Committee, might turn out to be consistent with
output remaining close to its potential. Indeed,
because policy actions over the previous eighteen
months had significantly reduced the degree of
monetary accommodation, Committee members thought that
the outlook for their near-term policy actions was
becoming considerably less certain. In such an
environment, policy decisions would increasingly
depend on incoming data and their implications for
future economic growth and inflation. Nonetheless, the
Committee indicated that some further measured policy
firming was likely to be needed to keep the risks to
the attainment of its goals of sustainable economic
growth and price stability roughly in balance.

Over the period leading up to the January 2006
meeting, incoming data on economic activity were
uneven. The advance estimate of real GDP pointed to a
slowing in the growth of output in the fourth quarter,
but the underlying strength in consumer and business
spending suggested that the economic expansion
remained on solid footing. With the potential for
added pressures on inflation still evident, the FOMC
raised the target federal funds rate another 25 basis
points, bringing its level to 4-1/2 percent. In its
statement after the meeting, the Committee indicated
that some further policy firming may be necessary and
again noted that it would respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed.


Economic Projections for 2006 and 2007

In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in January, the
members of the Board of Governors and the Federal
Reserve Bank presidents, all of whom participate in
the deliberations of the FOMC, provided economic
projections for 2006 and 2007. The central tendency of
the FOMC participants' forecasts for the increase in
real GDP is about 3-1/2 percent over the four quarters
of 2006 and 3 percent to 3-1/2 percent in 2007. The
civilian unemployment rate is expected to lie between
4-3/4 percent and 5 percent in the fourth quarter of
2006 and to remain in that area in 2007. As for
inflation, the FOMC participants expect that the price
index for personal consumption expenditures excluding
food and energy (core PCE) will rise about 2 percent
in 2006 and between 1-3/4 percent and 2 percent in
2007.


SECTION 2

ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN 2005 AND EARLY
2006

The economic expansion remained firmly entrenched in
2005, although the growth of real GDP late in the year
was apparently restrained by the effects of the
hurricanes and by sharp drops in some volatile
categories of spending. In the labor market, payroll
employment rose moderately for a second year in a row,
and the unemployment rate declined further. As in
2004, headline inflation was boosted appreciably by
soaring energy prices; however, core inflation
remained subdued. In 2005, financial market conditions
were once again supportive of growth, with long- term
market interest rates low and credit spreads and risk
premiums narrow.


The Household Sector

Consumer Spending

Consumer spending had gathered considerable steam in
2003 and 2004 and remained vigorous in 2005. Higher
energy prices last year continued to siphon off
household purchasing power, and short-term interest
rates moved up; nevertheless, spending was again
bolstered by an improving labor market and rising
household wealth.

Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) had
posted back-to-back increases of 3-3/4 percent in 2003
and 2004 and continued to rise at about that pace over
the first three quarters of 2005; in the fourth
quarter, PCE growth slowed to an annual rate of just 1
percent as consumer outlays for motor vehicles
slackened after a surge prompted by last summer's
"employee discount" programs. For 2005 as a whole,
sales of light vehicles  (cars, vans, sport-utility
vehicles, and pickup trucks) totaled nearly 17 million
units, about the same as the annual figure for 2004.
Real spending on consumer goods other than motor
vehicles was robust in 2005, with substantial gains
almost across the board; a notable exception was real
spending on gasoline, which was up only modestly for a
second year in a row as prices at the pump soared.
Real expenditures on services rose moderately in 2005,
as a sizable further increase in outlays for medical
care was partly offset by a relatively small gain in
outlays for energy services.

Excluding the estimated effects of the one-time
special dividend payment that Microsoft made in
December 2004, disposable personal income (DPI)--that
is, personal income less personal current taxes--rose
about 1-1/2 percent in real terms in 2005,
considerably less than in 2003 and 2004. Although
aggregate wages and salaries advanced moderately last
year and some other major types of nominal income
posted notable gains, the increases in real terms were
eroded by the rise in energy prices. In addition,
personal tax payments rose faster last year than did
personal income as measured in the national income and
product accounts (NIPA). In the second half of the
year, the growth of real DPI was volatile, mainly
because of the hurricanes. Rental income and
proprietors' income were pulled down in the third
quarter as a result of uninsured losses on residential
and business property. Real DPI snapped back in the
fourth quarter as income in these hurricane-affected
categories rebounded from the exceptionally low levels
in the third quarter.

Although the run-up in energy prices restrained the
growth of real DPI in 2005, its effect on overall
spending appears to have been largely offset by other
factors. In particular, sharp increases in household
wealth since 2002 have provided many households with
the resources and inclination to sustain their
spending through a period of relatively weak growth of
real income. Household net worth, which typically
feeds through to spending over several quarters,
posted sizable gains in 2003 and 2004, and it rose
further in 2005 as house values continued to climb and
as stock prices moved modestly higher. At the end of
the third quarter (the most recent period for which
complete data on wealth are available), the ratio of
household net worth to disposable income stood at
5.65, well above its long-run average level of 4.75.
Meanwhile, surveys by the Michigan Survey Research
Center (SRC) and the Conference Board suggest that,
apart from the first few months after the hurricanes,
consumer confidence was about at the favorable levels
that had prevailed in 2004. All in all, personal
outlays exceeded disposable income in 2005. As a
result, the personal saving rate, which had dropped
below 2 percent in 2004, fell further in 2005, ending
the year at negative 1/2 percent.


Residential Investment

Activity in the housing sector remained torrid through
much of 2005. By the end of the year, however, a few
tentative signs of cooling had begun to appear. In the
single-family sector, starts of new units dipped in
December after a string of exceptionally strong
months; still, they totaled 1.7 million for the year
as a whole--6-1/2 percent above the already rapid pace
in 2004. Starts in the multifamily sector totaled
350,000 in 2005, a pace similar to that of the
preceding three years. Real expenditures on
residential structures--which include outlays not only
for new construction but also for additions and
alterations as well as commissions paid to real estate
agents--rose nearly 8 percent in 2005, the fourth
large yearly increase in a row.

Sales of both new and existing homes set records in
2005, although they, like housing starts, seem to have
lost some steam late in the year.  Rates on thirty-
year fixed-rate mortgages were in the neighborhood of
5-3/4 percent for much of the year, but they rose in
the autumn. Since October, they have averaged close to
6-1/4 percent, at the upper end of the narrow range
that has prevailed since 2003 but still fairly low by
historical standards. Rates on adjustable-rate
mortgages have been trending up since early 2004. The
softening of home sales in recent months has
contributed to an updrift in the stock of unsold new
and existing homes. As of December, the stock of
unsold new homes was equal to nearly five months of
supply when measured at that month's sales pace.
Between 1998 and 2004, the stock of unsold new homes
had averaged about four months of supply.

Measures of house prices that attempt to control for
shifts in the quality and composition of homes sold
show that prices continued to rise rapidly through the
third quarter of 2005, though partial data for the
fourth quarter point to some slowing. Notably, the
purchase-only version of the repeat-transactions price
index for existing homes, which is published by the
Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight and
tracks sales of the same houses over time, rose 11
percent over the year ending in the third quarter (the
latest available data), once again outstripping the
increases in household incomes and rents. The Census
Bureau's constant-quality price index for new homes,
which controls for changes in the composition of sales
by geography, home size, and other readily observable
characteristics, had also shown sizable increases
through the third quarter, but it decelerated sharply
in the fourth quarter and was up just 4-3/4 percent
over 2005 as a whole; in 2004, this measure had risen
8-1/2 percent.


Household Finance

Household debt expanded about 10-1/2 percent at an
annual rate over the first three quarters of last
year, roughly the same brisk pace as had been
registered in 2004. Home-mortgage debt continued to
grow rapidly, as homeowners took advantage of the
further sizable increases in house prices last year.
The use of alternative mortgage products spread
further in 2005, in part because rising home values
generally made house purchases less affordable. Last
May federal regulators issued guidance promoting sound
risk-management practices to financial institutions
with home equity lending programs. Mortgage-related
borrowing likely took the place of some funding with
consumer credit, which expanded only modestly again
last year. Overall, the expansion in household debt
outpaced the growth in disposable personal income, and
the financial obligations ratio moved up to a level
close to the peak that it had reached earlier this
decade. However, the relatively low readings on most
measures of loan delinquencies last year indicate that
most households were not struggling to meet their
obligations.

A large number of households filed for bankruptcy in
the weeks leading up to October 17, the date when a
new bankruptcy law took effect. The law was designed
in part to diminish the ability of households to
discharge their debts through chapter 7 filings. After
the new law became effective, filings fell sharply to
a level significantly below the average of recent
years, and they have since remained low. This suggests
that, to avoid the new rules, some households
accelerated filings they would have undertaken
eventually even under the old law. The spike in
bankruptcies appears to have induced a jump in charge-
offs of consumer loans in the fourth quarter.


The Business Sector

Fixed Investment

Real business fixed investment rose 6-1/2 percent in
2005. Real spending on equipment and software (E&S)
posted an increase of more than 8 percent after rising
nearly 14 percent in 2004. The broadly based growth in
E&S spending last year was supported by favorable
fundamentals: appreciable growth in final sales, ample
financial resources in the corporate sector, and
supportive conditions in financial markets.

Real investment in high-technology equipment rose 17
percent in 2005, as further declines in prices
provided a substantial incentive for firms to step up
their outlays on such items; the increase was 5
percentage points faster than in 2003 and 2004 and
about in line with the average annual gain over the
past twenty-five years. Spending on communications
equipment was exceptionally strong last year, as
telecom service providers rolled out major new fiber-
optic systems and third-generation wireless gear.
Business spending for computing equipment rose roughly
30 percent in real terms, a pace close to its
historical average, while spending on software posted
its largest increase in several years.

Although aircraft investment remained depressed as
domestic airlines continued to grapple with
overcapacity and soaring fuel prices, the other major
categories of E&S spending outside the high-tech area
did well in 2005. Business outlays on motor vehicles
rose markedly, with the demand for heavy trucks
especially strong. Investment in equipment other than
high-tech and transportation goods--a broad category
that accounts for nearly half of E&S spending when
measured in nominal terms--barely rose in real terms
over the first half of 2005. Investment in this
category sped up after midyear, to increase moderately
over the year as a whole.

Apart from the drilling and mining sector, where
investment has strengthened in response to higher
energy prices, outlays for nonresidential construction
have yet to gain much traction. Spending on office and
commercial structures has been essentially flat since
2003; construction of manufacturing facilities leveled
out in 2005 after having firmed in late 2004; and
investment in the power and communications sector
moved down further last year. However, vacancy rates
have continued to reverse some of the run-up that
occurred between 2000 and 2003, and some industry
reports suggest that an upturn in building activity is
in train.


Inventory Investment

After having been exceptionally restrained earlier in
the economic expansion, inventory investment picked up
sharply in 2004, and the higher pace of accumulation
extended into early 2005. The step-up in accumulation,
which provided considerable impetus to industrial
production for a time, brought stocks into better
alignment with sales and set the stage for a
subsequent downswing in inventory investment.
Inventories in the motor vehicle sector were drawn
down in both the second and third quarters, though
accumulation resumed in the fourth quarter after last
summer's surge in sales cleared out dealers' lots.
Apart from motor vehicles, real stockbuilding slowed
sharply over the course of the year and, according to
the advance NIPA estimate, came to a halt in the
fourth quarter.  At year-end, inventories seemed to be
in reasonable alignment with sales, even taking into
account the downward trend in inventory-sales ratios
that has resulted from the ongoing improvement in
supply-chain management.


Corporate Profits and Business Finance

With profits posting further solid gains in 2005 and
ample liquid assets on corporate balance sheets,
nonfinancial businesses were able to finance much of
their capital expenditures out of internal funds, pay
record sums to shareholders in the form of share
buybacks, and still maintain strong balance sheets.
Nonetheless, elevated merger and acquisition activity
and the considerable rise in share buybacks boosted
the pace of business borrowing. Short-term borrowing
rose significantly, driven by financing from banks.
The issuance of long-term debt remained moderate
overall, but debt related to commercial mortgages
continued to expand rapidly. Indicators of corporate
credit quality generally remained favorable.

Corporate profits continued to grow strongly in 2005.
The ratio of before-tax profits of domestic
nonfinancial corporations to that sector's gross value
added rose to more than 12 percent, near its 1997
peak. Gains in earnings were fairly widespread, with
profits in the petroleum and gas industries especially
strong. In the fourth quarter of 2005, operating
earnings per share for S&P 500 firms appear to have
been nearly 14 percent above their level four quarters
earlier.

Gross equity issuance remained modest in 2005, while
net equity issuance sank into deeply negative
territory as corporations retired shares at a rapid
pace. Both a jump in cash-financed mergers and a
record-setting level of share repurchases were spurred
by the strong growth of profits as well as by the
substantial liquidity that firms had built up in
recent years.

Net corporate bond issuance was subdued in 2005, as
modest growth in nominal capital expenditures, strong
cash positions, and robust profits apparently limited
the demand for such financing. However, commercial-
mortgage debt grew rapidly last year. Gross issuance
of commercial-mortgage-backed securities likely
reached a record pace in the fourth quarter.

Short-term borrowing by businesses rose smartly in
2005, as business lending by both large and small
commercial banks surged. Throughout the year,
respondents to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Surveys
indicated that their institutions had further eased
standards and terms for lending to businesses and that
the demand for such loans had continued to strengthen.
Most respondents attributed the stronger demand to
borrowers' increased need to finance inventories,
accounts receivable, and investment in plant and
equipment; a substantial fraction of respondents to
some surveys also pointed to a pickup in merger and
acquisition activity. By contrast, outstanding
commercial paper declined last year.

Readings on credit quality for nonfinancial companies
generally remained favorable in 2005 despite some
pockets of distress. The amount of corporate debt that
was downgraded by Moody's Investors Service last year
exceeded the amount that was upgraded, mainly as a
result of the high-profile downgrades of the debt of
General Motors and Ford. After trending down over the
first three quarters of last year, the six-month
trailing bond default rate moved up in the fall, most
notably because of the bankruptcies of Delta Air
Lines, Northwest Airlines, Delphi, and Calpine.
However, these bankruptcies were widely anticipated
and had little effect on other measures of aggregate
credit quality. The credit quality of commercial
mortgage debt also appeared to remain robust during
2005; delinquency rates on commercial mortgages held
by banks and on those pooled into securities trended
down on balance over last year, while delinquencies on
mortgages held by insurance companies remained low.


The Government Sector

Federal Government

The deficit in the federal unified budget narrowed
appreciably in fiscal year 2005. Although outlays
continued to rise rapidly, receipts rose even faster;
as a consequence, the deficit fell to $318 billion,
roughly $100 billion less than the deficit in fiscal
2004. The latest projections from the Administration
and the Congressional Budget Office, however, point to
a deterioration in the unified budget position in
fiscal 2006, in part because of the start of the
Medicare drug benefit and the need to pay for post-
hurricane reconstruction and relief.

Nominal federal spending rose nearly 8 percent in
fiscal 2005 and stood at about 20 percent of GDP--
virtually the same as in 2003 and 2004 but 1-1/2
percentage points above the recent low in fiscal 2000.
Defense spending rose 8-1/2 percent after three years
of double-digit increases; outlays for nondefense
discretionary programs moved up further as well, in
part because of higher spending for education and for
disaster relief. (Spending on disaster relief in
fiscal 2005, which ended on September 30, was
primarily for needs that emerged before Hurricane
Katrina.) As for the major health programs, Medicare
outlays continued to climb. Medicaid spending rose
relatively slowly, mainly because it had been boosted
during much of fiscal 2004 by the temporary increase
in the federal share of the program's costs included
in the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act
of 2003 (JGTRRA). Net interest payments, which had
declined steadily from 1998 to 2003 and had increased
only moderately in 2004, were up significantly in
fiscal 2005 as short-term interest rates rose. Thus
far in fiscal 2006, outlays have continued to rise
rapidly, in part because of heavy spending for flood
insurance payouts and other hurricane-related disaster
relief. According to the NIPA, real federal
expenditures on consumption and gross investment, the
part of government spending that is a component of
real GDP, increased 1-1/4 percent over the four
quarters of calendar year 2005.

Federal receipts rose 14-1/2 percent in fiscal 2005;
as a ratio to GDP, they stood at 17-1/2 percent--more
than 1 percentage point higher than in 2004. Corporate
payments rose nearly 50 percent, lifted by the robust
profits of 2004 and 2005 and the termination of the
partial-expensing tax incentive at the end of calendar
2004. Individual income taxes increased nearly 15
percent; nonwithheld taxes rose especially rapidly
because of both substantial strength in nonwage
taxable incomes (including capital gains) and certain
features of JGTRRA that altered the timing of tax
payments in a way that temporarily reduced the level
of collections in 2004. Social insurance taxes rose in
line with wages and salaries.

Mirroring the narrowing of the unified deficit,
federal saving (essentially, the unified surplus or
deficit adjusted to conform to the accounting
practices followed in the NIPA) improved from negative
3-1/2 percent of GDP in calendar 2004 to negative 2-
1/2 percent in the first half of 2005.  However, the
beneficial effect of the smaller deficit in terms of
national saving was essentially offset by a sharp
decline in personal saving. Measured net of estimated
depreciation, national saving in the first half of
2005 was equal to just 1-1/2 percent of GDP, about the
same as in 2004 and well below the recent highs of
more than 6 percent of GDP in the late 1990s. In the
third quarter, net saving was dragged down by sizable
hurricane-related reductions in both federal and
nonfederal net saving; excluding these one-time
factors, net saving in the third quarter would have
been roughly the same as it was in the first half of
the year. If not reversed over the longer haul,
persistent low levels of saving will necessitate
either slower capital formation or continued heavy
borrowing from abroad, either of which would hamper
the ability of the nation to cope with the retirement
needs of the baby-boom generation and would retard the
growth of the standard of living.


Federal Borrowing

Borrowing by the Treasury moderated somewhat in
calendar year 2005--federal debt rose 7 percent last
year after increasing 9 percent in 2004. Much of the
improvement reflected the surge in tax receipts noted
earlier. As a result, the amount of Treasury bills
outstanding contracted on net in 2005, and Treasury
sales of coupon securities declined. As was widely
anticipated, the Treasury announced in August that it
would resume regular semiannual issuance of a thirty-
year nominal bond. The first such auction, held on
February 9, 2006, was well received, with a high level
of participation from indirect bidders. The Treasury
expects issuance of the thirty-year bond to help
stabilize the average maturity of outstanding
marketable Treasury debt, which declined from a high
of about seventy months at the end of 2000 to fifty-
three months at the end of 2005.

Federal debt held by the public as a percentage of
nominal GDP was steady during 2005 and stood at about
36 percent at the end of the third quarter. The
federal debt ceiling did not need to be raised last
year, but the Treasury has announced that it expects
that the debt will reach its statutory ceiling in
February 2006.

The appetite for Treasury securities among foreign
investors remained strong in the aggregate in 2005.
The proportion of outstanding Treasury securities held
by foreign investors is estimated to have climbed to
slightly more than 45 percent in the third quarter of
2005, a record. Data from the Treasury International
Capital reporting system suggest that net purchases of
Treasury securities by foreign private investors
jumped last year, whereas such purchases by foreign
official institutions slowed significantly amid upward
pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar.


State and Local Governments

The fiscal positions of state and local governments
continued to improve in 2005. Strong growth in income
and retail sales boosted revenues, as did rising
property values. And although the sector continued to
grapple with higher medical costs and pressures to
restore funding to programs that had been cut back
earlier in the decade, states and localities generally
kept a tight rein on current outlays. On a NIPA basis,
net saving by state and local governments--which is
broadly similar to the surplus in an operating budget-
-turned positive in the first half of 2005 after
having been negative between 2002 and 2004, and it
would have remained positive in the third quarter in
the absence of the hurricanes. The sizable revenue
gains reported by many states in fiscal 2005, which
ended on June 30 in all but four states, appear to
have extended into fiscal 2006. Even so, some
governments are still struggling with strained fiscal
situations, and some face significant structural
imbalances in their budgets that likely will be
exacerbated in coming years by the need to provide
pensions and health care to a growing number of
retired employees. In addition, the jurisdictions in
the Gulf Coast region confront the dual challenge of
substantial post-hurricane demands and diminished
flows of tax revenues.

According to the NIPA, real expenditures on
consumption and gross investment by state and local
governments rose 1-1/4 percent in 2005. Real outlays
for current consumption were up only about 1 percent
for a second year, in part because of the relatively
slow pace of hiring. Real investment expenditures also
registered a small gain.


State and Local Government Borrowing

Borrowing by state and local governments picked up in
2005. Gross issuance of municipal securities was
brisk, as the relatively low level of longer-term
market interest rates spurred advance refundings of
outstanding securities. The bulk of new capital issues
last year reportedly was earmarked for education-
related projects. Credit quality in the state and
local sector generally remained favorable in 2005.
Notable exceptions were the obligations of numerous
municipal issuers in Michigan, which were downgraded
last year largely as a consequence of the difficulties
of GM and Ford. In addition, the obligations of a
number of issuers in the regions that were hit by last
year's hurricanes were downgraded in the fourth
quarter, and some bonds from these areas remain on
watch. Despite these isolated troubles, rating
upgrades of municipal bonds slightly outpaced
downgrades in 2005.


The External Sector

The U.S. current account deficit widened further in
2005. At an annual rate, it came in at just under $800
billion, or about 6-1/4 percent of nominal GDP, in the
first three quarters (the latest available data). As
in the past, a substantial portion of the widening of
the current account deficit came from a larger deficit
on trade of goods and services, but a decrease in net
investment income also worsened the external account.
Net investment income edged into negative territory in
the second quarter of 2005 for the first time in the
post-World War II period. Unilateral transfer payments
to foreigners dropped sharply on net in the third
quarter because of a surge in receipts from foreign
insurance companies for damage caused by the
hurricanes, leading to a slight narrowing of the
deficit from the previous quarter. The trade data
through December showed that the U.S. trade deficit
widened further in the fourth quarter of 2005, to
about $790 billion at an annual rate. This increase
suggests that the fourth-quarter current account
deficit, yet to be reported, will also widen
substantially.


International Trade

Real exports of goods and services continued the solid
pace of expansion registered in both 2003 and 2004;
they rose an estimated 5-3/4 percent in 2005,
supported by robust foreign economic activity. Export
growth was rapid in the first half of the year,
spurred by the depreciation of the dollar in previous
years; it then slowed in the second half of the year,
in part owing to the dollar's appreciation since the
beginning of 2005. For the year as a whole, exports of
capital goods posted solid growth. Exports of aircraft
performed especially well despite an interruption of
their production in September because of a strike at
Boeing. Exports of industrial supplies were hampered
late in the year by the effects of the hurricanes on
production and shipping in the Gulf  Coast region. By
destination, exports to Canada and Mexico grew rapidly
in 2005, those to Western Europe also increased, but
exports to Japan were relatively weak. Exports of
services rose about 3 percent in 2005 in real terms.

Prices of exported goods increased at an annual rate
of 2-3/4 percent in 2005, a bit below the rate of
increase in 2004. Prices decelerated in the second and
third quarters as the dollar strengthened and as
pressures on prices of agricultural exports and other
nonfuel commodities ebbed. Prices accelerated again in
the fourth quarter, when a sharp rise in the prices of
oil and metals drove up prices for many
nonagricultural industrial supplies.

After expanding at a double-digit pace in 2004, real
imports of goods and services decelerated to about 4-
1/2 percent in 2005, even as U.S. GDP growth remained
robust. Although overall growth of non-oil imports was
slower last year than in 2004, capital goods imports
continued strong. The hurricanes affected several
categories of imports. Despite a contraction of
domestic oil consumption, real imports of oil expanded
to offset reduced production in the Gulf Coast region.
Chemicals imports also registered strong gains toward
year-end amid hurricane-related losses in domestic
production. Real imports of services moved up only 2-
1/4 percent in 2005, a substantial cooling from their
2004 pace.

Prices of imported goods excluding oil and natural gas
increased at an annual rate of 1-1/2 percent in 2005,
down from a rate of 2-3/4 percent in 2004. Prices
decelerated in midyear as the dollar appreciated and
nonfuel commodity prices steadied. However, import
prices accelerated in the fourth quarter of 2005, led
by higher prices for chemicals, metals, and building
materials. In global commodity markets, prices of
metals increased an average of 30 percent in 2005, a
surge that reflected both robust global demand and
limited increases in supply.

A key event in 2005 was the substantial increase in
the price of crude oil. The spot price of West Texas
intermediate (WTI) crude oil climbed from about $43
per barrel at the start of 2005 to a peak of about $70
per barrel in late August, at the time of Hurricane
Katrina. The spot price then edged down as production
revived in the Gulf of Mexico and as above-average
temperatures in the United States reduced oil demand.
After falling to below $60 per barrel by late
November, oil prices moved up to an average of about
$65 per barrel for January, in part on concerns about
possible disruptions of foreign supply. However, oil
prices have declined so far in February. Growing
conviction among traders that oil-market conditions
would remain tight in future years pushed the price of
the far-dated NYMEX oil futures contract (currently
for delivery in 2012) from an average of $38 per
barrel for January 2005 to about $61 per barrel for
January 2006.

Although the rate of growth in world oil consumption
slowed in 2005 from its torrid pace of 2004, spare
production capacity among OPEC members remained
limited, at an estimated level of only about 1 million
barrels per day. With the perception that additional
capacity would be slow to come on line, oil markets
were highly sensitive to news about fluctuations in
supply and demand. Market participants' concerns about
crude oil supply were heightened by production
difficulties in Iraq and by the resumption of nuclear
activities in Iran, both posing risks to the stability
of Middle East supply. Elsewhere, production problems
in Nigeria stemming from social unrest and a marked
slowdown in the growth of Russian production also kept
upward pressure on oil prices throughout the year.

Domestic crude oil supply was severely hampered by
last year's hurricanes, which were the most damaging
in the history of the U.S. energy industry. At the
peak of the disruption, all U.S. crude oil production
in the Gulf of Mexico (about 28 percent of total U.S.
production) and 88 percent of U.S. natural gas
production there (about 17 percent of total U.S.
production) were shut in. At the end of January 2006,
25 percent of Gulf oil production remained shut in,
and cumulative lost production in the Gulf stood at
about 22 percent of the average annual output from
that region. Refinery outages, which peaked after
Hurricane Rita at more than one-fourth of total U.S.
refining capacity, caused sharp increases in the
prices of refined products. Retail gasoline prices in
the United States jumped to more than $3 per gallon in
early September, briefly crimping gasoline demand and,
in turn, demand for crude oil. Petroleum product
prices returned to pre-hurricane levels within a few
weeks as imports soared and refineries resumed
operations, but they began to rise again in December
and January.


The Financial Account

In 2005, foreign official financial inflows slowed
from their extraordinary pace of 2004 but remained
sizable. Most of these official inflows took the form
of purchases of U.S. long-term government and private
securities for reserve accumulation, primarily by
Asian central banks. The slowdown in foreign official
inflows last year was more than offset, however, by an
increase in foreign private purchases of U.S.
securities. Most of this pickup was concentrated in
bonds, as in 2004, but foreign private purchases of
U.S. equities also increased somewhat. Foreign direct
investment flows into the United States continued to
be strong in 2005, with the average pace during the
first three quarters a bit higher than in 2004.

U.S. residents' net purchases of foreign securities
remained brisk last year, near the levels recorded in
2003 and 2004, with smaller purchases of foreign bonds
offset by larger purchases of foreign equities. By
contrast, U.S. direct investment flows abroad slowed
markedly during the first half of 2005 and turned
negative in the third quarter. This unusual pattern
reflected responses to the partial tax holiday
provided in the 2004 Homeland Investment Act, which
allowed firms to repatriate at a preferential tax rate
previous years' earnings that had been reinvested in
their foreign affiliates.


The Labor Market

Employment and Unemployment

Conditions in the labor market continued to improve,
on balance, in 2005, although many individuals lost
jobs in the aftermath of the hurricanes. Nonfarm
payroll employment rose 175,000 per month, on average,
through August, the same as the average monthly
increase in 2004. Net hiring then slowed sharply in
September and October, as job losses in the Gulf Coast
region largely offset moderate increases in payrolls
elsewhere in the nation. In November and December,
monthly job growth was uneven, but it averaged
250,000, and hiring remained brisk in January. The
reemployment of many of those who lost jobs because of
the hurricanes appears to have provided a modest lift
to overall hiring in recent months. However, others
affected by the storms apparently have not found new
jobs yet, and the unemployment rate among evacuees
seems to have remained quite high.

Employment gains were widespread by industry in 2005.
As in 2004, hiring was especially strong at firms
supplying professional and business services and in
health care. The construction industry also continued
to exhibit a good deal of vigor, spurred by the
booming housing sector. Employment in retail trade and
in food services rose fairly briskly in the first half
of the year, but it was held down in the second half
by job losses in the Gulf Coast region. In the
manufacturing sector, employment was essentially flat
for a second year after three years of steep declines.
In the government sector, state and local payrolls
continued to rise modestly, while civilian employment
in the federal government was about unchanged.

After hovering around 5-1/2 percent during the second
half of 2004, the unemployment rate fell, on net, over
the first three months of 2005. During the remainder
of the year, it fluctuated in a narrow range around 5
percent. In January 2006, it decreased to 4.7 percent.
The labor force participation rate, which had dropped
noticeably between 2000 and 2004, edged up, on net, in
2005. The participation rate in January 2006 was 66
percent, well below the high of 67-1/4 percent reached
in early 2000 but not far from its trend, which has
been declining in recent years as a consequence of
demographic forces.

Other indicators also pointed to a gradual improvement
in labor market conditions over the course of 2005.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance drifted
lower, and the job openings rate moved up. At year-
end, the Conference Board reported that a larger
proportion of respondents to its monthly survey
thought that jobs were plentiful than thought that
jobs were hard to get.


Productivity and Labor Costs

Labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector
continued to advance in 2005. Last year's increase in
output per hour of 2-1/4 percent was noticeably below
the average annual gain over the preceding four years.
But taking the longer view, growth in labor
productivity over the past five years has averaged 3-
1/4 percent per year, nearly 3/4 percentage point
faster than the already impressive gains posted
between 1995 and 2000. Productivity appears to have
received considerable impetus in recent years from a
number of factors, including the rapid pace of
technological change and the growing ability of firms
to use information and other technology to improve the
efficiency of their operations. Increases in the
amount of capital per worker, especially high-tech
capital, have also helped to spur productivity growth
over the past few years, although apparently by less
than was the case during the capital spending boom in
the late 1990s.

Increases in hourly labor compensation were moderate
in 2005 even though overall consumer prices rose
relatively rapidly for a second year and the downward
pressure on wages from labor market slack diminished.
As measured by the employment cost index (ECI) for
private nonfarm businesses, hourly compensation
increased 3 percent last year, 3/4 percentage point
less than in 2004. The wages and salaries component of
the ECI rose just 2-1/2 percent, the same as in 2004,
while the cost of providing benefits rose 4 percent
after two years of increases in the area of 6-1/2
percent to 7 percent. Much of the deceleration in
benefits costs was in employers' contributions to
retirement plans, which had increased markedly in 2003
and 2004 as firms ratcheted up their contributions to
defined-benefit plans to cover earlier declines in the
market value of the plans' assets. Health insurance
costs rose 6-1/2 percent in 2005, the smallest
increase since the late 1990s.

According to preliminary data, compensation per hour
in the nonfarm business (NFB) sector--an alternative
measure of compensation developments derived from the
data in the NIPA--rose 3-1/4 percent in 2005, about
the same rise as in the ECI. In 2004, NFB compensation
had risen nearly 6 percent; a fourth-quarter surge in
the value of stock option exercises, which are
excluded from the ECI, likely contributed to that
increase. The preliminary estimate for NFB
compensation in 2005 reflects the apparent reversal of
some of the late-2004 upswing in compensation, though
it is subject to revision when more-detailed
information becomes available later this year. In any
event, the deceleration in hourly compensation last
year held the increase in unit labor costs to 1
percent. Unit labor costs had risen more than 3
percent in 2004 after having been close to flat over
the preceding three years.


Prices

Headline inflation continued to be boosted by soaring
energy prices in 2005, while core inflation--which
excludes the direct effects of movements in food and
energy prices--remained subdued. The PCE chain-type
price index rose 3 percent for the second year in a
row. The increase in core PCE prices, which in 2004
had ticked up to 2-1/4 percent, remained high in early
2005 by recent standards. Core PCE inflation
subsequently subsided and came in a shade below 2
percent for the year as a whole. The market-based
component of the core PCE price index--which excludes
prices that must be imputed because they cannot be
observed in market transactions and that often move
erratically--rose 1-3/4 percent in 2005, unchanged
from its pace in 2004.  A similar pattern is evident
in the core consumer price index, which rose about 2
percent in both 2004 and 2005, and in broad NIPA price
measures such as the price index for GDP, which was up
about 3 percent in both years.

The PCE price index for energy rose roughly 20 percent
in 2005 for the second year in a row. The nearly 25
percent increase in gasoline prices in 2005 largely
reflected the effects of the continuing surge in crude
oil prices on retail energy prices. Gasoline prices
recorded some dramatic spikes--notably in the spring
and after the hurricanes--when disruptions at
refineries depleted inventories and pushed up the
margin of the retail price over the already-elevated
cost of the associated crude oil. After peaking at
more than $3 per gallon in early September, gasoline
prices fell sharply over the balance of 2005 as demand
moderated, refinery capacity in the Gulf Coast region
came back on line, and imports surged. In January
2006, gasoline prices turned up in response to higher
crude oil costs, and they are now running about 50
cents per gallon higher than they were in January
2005.

Consumer prices for natural gas rose more than 35
percent in 2005, with most of the increase coming in
the second half of the year. Prices started to move up
around midyear and then skyrocketed in September and
October after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita curtailed
production in the Gulf of Mexico. Most of the shut-in
production was restored by late 2005, and inventories
remained ample for a normal heating season, but spot
natural gas prices held at elevated levels through
mid-December. They have since plummeted in response to
unseasonably warm weather in much of the nation but
are still far above their levels of a year ago.
Reflecting higher input costs, PCE electricity prices
rose 10 percent in 2005 after a much smaller rise in
2004.

Consumer food prices rose about 2 percent in 2005
after slightly larger increases in 2003 and 2004. Food
prices received some upward pressure late in the year.
Crop damage from Hurricane Wilma temporarily pushed up
the prices of some fruits and vegetables, and beef
prices were boosted by the resumption of some exports
to Pacific Rim countries after the lifting in early
December of an extended ban (which was subsequently
reinstated in January 2006). But, in general, the
higher production of several livestock products and a
bumper harvest of grains helped to limit increases in
retail food prices to about the rate of core
inflation.

The broad contours of core inflation in 2005 were
about the same as those in 2004. Prices of core goods,
which had declined in 2002 and 2003, were about flat
for a second year. Prices of core services decelerated
a bit--from about 3 percent in 2004 to 2-3/4 percent
in 2005. The deceleration was concentrated in some
nonmarket categories--in particular, prices of
financial services provided by banks without explicit
charge, foreign travel by U.S. residents, and life and
motor vehicle insurance--that had posted large
increases in 2004. With the notable exception of
airfares, which picked up in 2005 after having fallen
in 2004, prices in other market-based categories of
services rose about as fast as they had in 2004.

The run-up in energy prices in 2005 boosted the cost
of producing other goods and services--especially for
energy-intensive items, including chemicals, plastics,
and nitrogenous fertilizers. In addition, prices of
other commodities such as lumber and a variety of
metals, which had soared in 2004 in response to the
strengthening of economic activity worldwide, moved up
further in early 2005. Many of those prices slackened
in the spring and summer as industrial production
softened, but they turned up again in the fall. All
told, however, the higher input costs left only a
small mark on the prices of core goods and services. A
major reason is that the robust upward trend in labor
productivity helped to hold labor costs in check and
gave firms scope to absorb cost increases.

Near-term inflation expectations have come under some
upward pressure over the past year, but recent
readings have been close to those at the beginning of
2005. Apart from an energy-related spurt to 4-1/2
percent in early autumn, the Michigan SRC measure of
households' median expectation for inflation over the
next twelve months has been in the neighborhood of 3
percent to 3-1/4 percent since March 2005 after
hovering in the area of 2-3/4 percent to 3 percent in
late 2004 and early 2005. In January 2006, it stood at
3 percent. The Michigan SRC measure of the median
expectation for inflation over the next five to ten
years was also running a bit above 3 percent in late
2005, but it dipped to 2.9 percent in January of this
year, a reading similar to those in 2004 and in the
first eight months of 2005. Other indicators likewise
suggest that longer-run inflation expectations have
remained well contained. According to the Survey of
Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, expectations of
inflation over the next ten years remained at 2-1/2
percent in 2005, as they have since 1998. In addition,
inflation compensation, as measured by the spread of
yields on nominal Treasury securities over their
inflation-protected counterparts, fell a bit, on
balance, in 2005.


U.S. Financial Markets

U.S. financial markets withstood some strains in 2005,
most notably a large cumulative upward revision to the
expected path of monetary policy, sharp increases in
energy prices, troubles in the auto and airline
sectors, and three major hurricanes. Longer-term
market interest rates remained low, corporate risk
spreads stayed relatively narrow by historical
standards, and equity prices advanced modestly. Banks
continued to ease standards and terms on loans to
businesses, and bank lending to businesses surged.
Overall, debt growth in the business sector picked up,
and the expansion of household debt remained quite
brisk, but federal borrowing dropped back. The M2
monetary aggregate grew moderately.


Interest Rates

The FOMC lifted the target federal funds rate a total
of 2 percentage points in 2005, nearly 1 percentage
point more than market participants had anticipated at
the start of the year. Over the first half of 2005,
short- and intermediate-term interest rates rose in
line with the gradual firming in the stance of
monetary policy, but longer-term interest rates moved
lower on balance. For a time early in the year, rising
oil prices and incoming data showing higher-than-
expected inflation appeared to lift policy
expectations as well as interest rates at
intermediate- and longer-term horizons. The minutes of
the December 2004 FOMC meeting, released on January 4,
2005, and the FOMC's conditioning of its risk
assessment on "appropriate monetary policy action"
after its March 2005 meeting were read as indicating
more concern among Committee members about inflation
pressures than investors had anticipated. The ten-year
Treasury yield moved up after Chairman Greenspan's
semiannual congressional testimony in February 2005,
as investors reportedly focused on his remark that the
low level of long-term interest rates at that time was
a "conundrum." However, the subsequent release of
weaker-than-expected data on consumer spending,
consumer sentiment, and output led investors to mark
down again their anticipated path for monetary policy
and caused intermediate-term Treasury yields to
retreat somewhat on balance during the second quarter,
while the ten-year Treasury yield declined sharply.

On balance over the second half of the year, investors
became more confident that the economic expansion had
substantial momentum, and the expected path of policy
and nominal Treasury yields moved considerably higher.
Economic data that came in over the summer months
suggested more strength in spending and output than
investors had been anticipating. However, in response
to the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina in
August and the subsequent landfall of two additional
major storms, investors marked down sharply their
expectations for the path of monetary policy,
predominantly at longer horizons, and nominal Treasury
yields dipped. Those declines in yields proved
temporary, though, as incoming data in the weeks after
the hurricanes indicated that output had been
expanding briskly before the storms hit and that the
resulting disruptions to economic activity would
probably be less severe than investors had initially
feared. In addition, a drop in some energy prices
might have contributed to an upgrading of the economic
outlook. Over the remaining three months of the year,
data on spending and production generally appeared
robust, and investors raised their expectations for
the path of monetary policy a bit more.

On net in 2005, the yield on the two-year nominal
Treasury note rose about 135 basis points, whereas the
yield on the ten-year Treasury note increased only
about 15 basis points. As a result, longer-horizon
forward rates extended their decline that had begun
around the middle of 2004, the onset of the current
tightening cycle. Although the reasons for this large
cumulative drop are not entirely clear, this general
pattern was also evident last year in other major
industrialized economies, where longer-term interest
rates mainly declined. One possibility is that higher
energy prices might have led investors to trim their
assessment of the cumulative amount of monetary policy
restraint required over the longer run that would be
consistent with sustainable economic growth. Investors
also appeared to become less uncertain about the
outlook and so might have become more willing to
accept smaller risk premiums on long-term securities.
Another possible explanation is that long-term
inflation expectations have fallen and have become
more firmly anchored. As measured by the spread
between yields on nominal Treasury securities and
their inflation-protected counterparts, inflation
compensation fell a bit more than 30 basis points at
the ten-year horizon over 2005. Finally, it is
possible that an excess of global saving over planned
investment has lowered real longer-term interest
rates.

In the corporate bond market, risk spreads widened
modestly in 2005, but the generally healthy state of
corporate balance sheets and the robust growth of
profits kept spreads low by historical standards.
Spreads in the auto sector were an exception, however,
as the troubles that emerged in the spring at GM and
Ford and the bankruptcy of Delphi last fall boosted
spreads sharply in this sector. The bankruptcies of
two major airlines and the revelation of apparent
accounting fraud at Refco, a large derivatives broker,
did not appear to have a material effect on broad
corporate risk spreads.

To date in 2006, amid uneven incoming economic data,
investors' expectations for the path of the target
federal funds rate have edged up, as have
intermediate- and longer-term nominal Treasury rates.
However, spreads on investment-grade corporate
securities have changed little, whereas those on
speculative-grade issues have declined somewhat.


Equity Markets

Share values, as measured by the Wilshire 5000 index,
rose about 4-1/2 percent in 2005. Higher energy prices
and expectations for tighter monetary policy damped
equity prices at times during the year, but these
downward pressures were offset by continued strong
corporate earnings growth and largely upbeat news on
the economy. The response of stock prices to the
hurricanes was generally muted--low longer-term
interest rates and the prospect of additional fiscal
stimulus apparently offset concerns that yet-higher
energy prices might trim economic growth. On net last
year, energy-related stocks registered substantial
gains in response to the rise in the price of oil. To
date in 2006, major equity indexes have risen modestly
amid largely positive news about fourth-quarter
earnings.

Volatilities of equity prices implied by prices on
options contracts on both the S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100
indexes remained low over most of 2005, apparently
owing to perceptions of only modest near-term
macroeconomic risk. However, the spread between the
twelve-month forward earnings-price ratio for S&P 500
firms and an estimate of the real long-term Treasury
yield--a measure of the long-term equity risk premium-
-widened a bit last year and is now in the upper part
of its range of the past two decades. Arithmetically,
the widening in this spread can be attributed to a
decline in the measure of the real long-term Treasury
yield; the measure of the earnings yield on the S&P
500 changed little on balance last year.


Debt and Financial Intermediation

The total debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors
expanded an estimated 9 percent in 2005, about the
same pace as in 2004. However, the composition of debt
growth differed somewhat from the previous year:
Borrowing by nonfinancial businesses picked up in 2005
while federal borrowing dropped back. The growth of
debt of the household sector remained brisk, driven by
the rapid expansion of mortgages.

Commercial bank credit expanded 10-1/2 percent in
2005, a bit faster than the brisk pace registered in
2004. Growth of commercial and industrial loans jumped
to 13-1/2 percent, the fastest pace in more than two
decades. As noted, senior loan officers reported in
quarterly surveys that they had eased terms and
standards on such loans last year. They attributed the
easing to an improved economic outlook and more-
aggressive competition from other banks and nonbank
lenders. They also reported that loan demand had
strengthened. Real estate lending by banks was brisk
again last year, though it cooled somewhat in the
fourth quarter in the wake of the backup in longer-
term interest rates. Consumer loans on banks' books
expanded rapidly during the first quarter of 2005 but
then less so over the balance of the year, in part
because some households substituted lower-cost
mortgage credit for consumer loans.

Measures of bank profitability in 2005 fell back a bit
from the very high levels posted in 2003 and 2004 but
remained robust by historical standards. Profitability
was restrained by vigorous competition and downward
pressure on net interest margins from increases in
market interest rates, but it was supported by
excellent asset quality and reductions in noninterest
expenses relative to assets. Banks' provisioning for
loan losses over the first three quarters of last year
was lower, on average, than in 2004, even with the
increase in provisioning in the third quarter owing to
the prospective surge in personal bankruptcies and to
the hurricanes.

Mortgage market assets held by government-sponsored
enterprises declined in 2005, as Fannie Mae reduced
its mortgage portfolio about 20 percent and the rate
of portfolio increase by Freddie Mac was somewhat
below the rate of growth of residential mortgage debt
in general. The reduction at Fannie Mae occurred
partly in response to regulatory concerns about the
adequacy of its capitalization. These concerns
increased substantially after the company revealed in
late 2004 that it had improperly accounted for certain
derivative transactions. Fannie Mae's share price
dropped about 30 percent last year, and Freddie Mac's
declined about 10 percent. Yield spreads on both
firms' debt over comparable-maturity Treasury
securities were little changed on net.


The M2 Monetary Aggregate

M2 rose 4 percent in 2005, a pace significantly slower
than the growth in nominal income and the lowest
annual rate of expansion in about a decade./1 As is
typical in a period of rising rates, the opportunity
cost of holding M2 assets increased significantly over
the course of the year, as changes in rates on liquid
deposits lagged those in market yields. Consequently,
growth in liquid deposits almost came to a halt
following double-digit expansion during the previous
several years. Some offset was provided by a rapid
increase in small time deposits, rates on which
remained better aligned with short-term market rates.
After having contracted sharply in the past couple of
years, shares of retail money market mutual funds were
about flat, on net, as the return on such balances
improved in line with short-term interest rates.
Hurricane relief efforts likely added a little to the
growth of M2 last year: Funds provided by the federal
government to displaced households and funds advanced
by insurance companies probably buoyed M2 over the
last four months of 2005, as did a rise in the use of
currency in the affected areas.


International Developments

Foreign economic activity remained strong in 2005, as
the global economy displayed resilience in the face of
sizable increases in energy prices. Manufacturing and
trade expanded in most industrial and emerging
economies. As in 2004, global economic growth in 2005
was driven importantly by strong demand from the
United States and China, but domestic demand picked up
in a number of other countries as well. The run-up in
prices of crude oil and other commodities over 2005
appeared to have had only a modest effect on measures
of inflation in most countries.

Cumulative changes in monetary policy in foreign
industrial economies during 2005 varied in direction
and, in contrast to the United States, were mostly
small. The European Central Bank, which had maintained
its main policy interest rate at 2 percent since the
middle of 2003, tightened 25 basis points late in
2005, citing a need to keep inflation expectations in
check. The Bank of England, after tightening 100 basis
points in 2004, lowered its policy rate 25 basis
points in August 2005, as the U.K. housing market had
cooled and as the growth of household spending and
business investment had slowed. The Bank of Canada
raised its target for the overnight rate a total of
100 basis points in the latter part of 2005 and the
beginning of 2006, stating that the Canadian economy
was operating again at full capacity. The Bank of
Japan did not depart in 2005 from its policy of
quantitative easing, as it continued to provide large
amounts of bank reserves to keep short-term interest
rates near zero. However, in the second half of the
year, amid growing evidence that an end to consumer
price deflation might be near, Bank of Japan officials
began to discuss publicly the possibility of ending
the policy in 2006.

Ten-year sovereign yields in the euro area and Canada
have declined 15 to 20 basis points on net since the
beginning of 2005, and ten-year U.K. sovereign yields
have dropped 35 basis points. Over the same period,
Japanese ten-year sovereign yields have risen about 15
basis points, somewhat less than U.S. Treasury yields
of the same maturity. Despite higher energy prices,
long-term inflation expectations appear to have
remained well contained abroad. In Europe, Canada, and
Japan, the differences between ten-year nominal and
inflation-indexed bond yields currently are little
changed from their levels at the start of 2005.

Our broadest measure of the nominal trade-weighted
exchange value of the dollar has risen 2-1/2 percent
on net since the beginning of 2005. The dollar likely
was supported by the FOMC's significant cumulative
policy tightening, only part of which had been
anticipated by market participants at the start of
2005. The dollar's overall appreciation was driven by
its sharp gains against the currencies of several
major industrial countries; the dollar depreciated on
average against the currencies of the United States'
other important trading partners. Since the start of
2005, the dollar has appreciated about 15 percent
versus the euro and the Japanese yen, and 10 percent
against the British pound. A notable exception to this
pattern is the Canadian dollar, against which the U.S.
dollar has depreciated 4 percent since early 2005.
With respect to currencies of other important trading
partners, the dollar has depreciated 6 percent against
the Mexican peso, 17 percent versus the Brazilian
real, and 7 percent against the Korean won.

Equity prices have risen substantially in most foreign
industrial and emerging-market countries since early
2005; these prices have been supported by the
continued global economic expansion and by interest
rates that, in most countries, have remained well
below historical averages. Rising commodity prices
have buoyed share prices of firms in the energy and
mining sectors, and share prices in the technology
sector have also increased sharply. Since the
beginning of 2005, headline equity indexes, measured
in local currencies, have risen about 20 percent on
net in the United Kingdom, 30 percent in the euro
area, and 45 percent in Japan. In the United States,
by contrast, equity prices have increased only
modestly over the same period.


Industrial Economies

After expanding at an annual rate of 5-1/4 percent in
the first half of 2005, Japanese real GDP growth
declined to 1 percent in the third quarter, largely
because of slower inventory accumulation. Throughout
the year, the most important source of support to
economic growth was domestic demand, which was lifted
by improvements in corporate profitability and labor
market conditions. The unemployment rate declined
sharply during 2005, ending the year at just under 4-
1/2 percent. The rate of deflation in core consumer
prices subsided considerably in 2005; in fact, from
December 2004 to December 2005, core prices posted a
0.1 percent increase. However, the GDP deflator
continued to fall at a slow rate.

Economic growth in the euro area remained weak in the
first half of 2005, at around a 1-1/2 percent annual
rate. Growth picked up to 2-1/2 percent in the third
quarter, spurred by stronger exports, especially by
Germany. However, weakness in household spending
persisted. The area-wide unemployment rate fell
slightly over the year, to 8-1/4 percent near year-
end, although employment only edged up. For the sixth
straight year, euro-area inflation remained just above
the ECB's medium-term goal of less than (but close to)
2 percent.

The rate of growth of real GDP in the United Kingdom
slowed from 3-1/4 percent in 2004 to 1-3/4 percent in
2005. The slowdown was marked by a substantial
deceleration of both private and government
consumption. Labor markets remained tight, however;
the unemployment rate of 2.9 percent in December was
up only slightly from the twenty-year low of 2.6
percent recorded in January 2005. Consumer price
inflation over the twelve months ending in December
2005 was 2 percent, in line with the central bank's
official target. In contrast to the substantial run-up
in real estate prices of 2004, housing price increases
in 2005 were small.

Canadian economic growth was solid again in 2005.
Recovering from a slow first quarter that featured a
sharp but temporary pullback in exports, real GDP
growth rebounded to around 3-1/2 percent in the second
and third quarters. For a second straight year, strong
domestic demand underpinned growth, but net exports
also made a positive contribution to growth late in
the year. Employment made gains, although not as large
as in the previous three years, and the unemployment
rate touched a thirty-year low of 6.4 percent at
year's end. After spiking in the third quarter on
rising gasoline prices, consumer price inflation
settled back toward 2 percent, the midpoint of the
Bank of Canada's inflation target range.


Emerging-Market Economies

Growth of real GDP in China remained vigorous in 2005,
supported again by robust domestic demand and exports.
Both personal consumption and investment expenditures
continued to grow rapidly during the year. Export
growth also remained strong through most of the year,
while import growth slowed. As a result, the Chinese
trade surplus more than tripled and exceeded $100
billion. Consumer price inflation in 2005 was low in
comparison with the previous year, when higher food
prices had caused inflation to surge; the twelve-month
change in consumer prices finished the year at just
over 1-1/2 percent.

On July 21, China revalued the renminbi 2.1 percent
versus the dollar and announced that henceforth it
would manage the value of its currency with reference
to a basket of foreign currencies. Since the July
revaluation, the exchange value of the renminbi versus
the dollar has risen about 1/2 percent. Chinese
authorities also have implemented some reforms of the
financial system that are intended to facilitate
further exchange rate flexibility, including the
introduction of an over-the-counter trading system in
the domestic foreign exchange market. China's foreign
exchange reserves increased more than $200 billion in
2005; the pace of reserve accumulation did not change
appreciably after the revaluation of the renminbi in
July.

In other emerging-market nations in Asia, economic
activity also picked up substantially in 2005, driven
by the growth of domestic demand and exports. Despite
the global rise of energy costs, consumer price
inflation generally remained contained. Equity indexes
registered large increases in a number of Asian
countries, led in many cases by gains in share prices
of technology firms. In particular, Korean equity
prices have risen about 45 percent since early 2005.
Several countries in the region added to their
holdings of foreign exchange reserves over the period,
but in all cases far less than China did.

After a solid performance in 2004, the Mexican economy
slowed in the first quarter of 2005 and contracted in
the second quarter because of weaker exports to the
United States and a sharp drop in agricultural
production. However, the Mexican economy recovered in
the second half of the year, as agricultural and
manufacturing production bounced back. Aggressive
tightening of monetary policy from early 2004 to March
2005 seemed to be successful in restraining
inflationary pressures: Consumer price inflation
declined from more than 5 percent at the end of 2004
to a bit less than 4 percent in January 2006, within
the central bank's target range of 2 percent to 4
percent. The soft economy and an improved outlook for
inflation led the Bank of Mexico to begin easing
policy in August 2005, and the central bank has
continued to ease since then. High oil revenues
boosted the public-sector surplus, and yield spreads
of Mexican sovereign debt over U.S. Treasuries
declined to record lows.

In Brazil, growth in economic activity was moderate in
the first half of 2005, and some indicators point to a
slowing over the second half. Nonetheless, risk
spreads of Brazilian sovereign debt declined over the
course of the year to their lowest levels since 1997,
the real appreciated strongly, and stock prices rose
sharply. Concerns over inflation kept monetary policy
very tight for most of the year, but the central bank
began easing in September, and the policy rate was
reduced a total of 250 basis points, to 17-1/4
percent, by January. In late December, Brazil paid in
full its debt to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), using a portion of its foreign exchange
reserves.

In Argentina, the economic recovery continued last
year, driven in part by increases in consumption and
investment. After more than three years in default,
the government completed a debt swap, restructuring
$80 billion in bonds and obtaining a participation
rate of 76 percent. Early this year, Argentina also
paid in full its IMF obligations out of its foreign
exchange reserves.  
